 Well, hello, everyone. My name is Rebecca Parsons. Welcome to the ThoughtWorks Technology podcast. I'm one of your recurring co-hosts, and I'm joined by one of our new recurring co-hosts, Lily Ryan. Hello, Lily. Hello, welcome, everyone. And what we want to talk about today are designed tools that take advantage of some of the innovations and artificial intelligence that we've seen. And we are joined by two people from our product and design organization, Kate Linton. Kate, would you introduce yourself please? Good morning, everyone, or what at the time of day it is for you right now. And thank you for having me here. I lead design community practice at ThoughtWorks. And Esther. Hi, everyone. Good morning. I am Esther. I'm the community practice for the Singapore office, and it's very nice to have us here. Excellent. I guess what I'd like to start with is how do you all view design as part of the software development life cycle? People think about, you know, developer tools and all of that, but how do you see design as a part of the software development life cycle and interacting with other roles on a software delivery team? Well, Rebecca, I see it as a really integral part of software development. It's an essential core role. And at ThoughtWorks, we try to very much work in parallel with delivery when we're designing and testing software with our users. So the process that we follow is a very tried and tested approach that starts usually with discovery and going out and understanding the people who are going to be using our product or service and the market, the competitors' faith. And then we work really closely with developers to understand the technical feasibility of what we're building. We test with prototypes, we test in the code, and we refine as we go. So it's really very much a collaborative effort with our product delivery teams. I tend to, I guess, not try to box myself in by, oh, I'm a designer, I do, like, interface design, I do user testing, but generally, I think everyone in the team at ThoughtWorks that we have problem solvers, right? So even as a designer, it doesn't mean that I can't maybe take my time to understand a bit of what, like, a text that does and how it actually affects how we design certain user experiences for people. So to me, it's like, I don't necessarily just think of myself as, oh, I'm just going to design screens, but I want to understand, like, hey, what, where's the data coming from? Then I'm putting like information on my screens and stuff like that. So I kind of try to, I guess, find problems to solve, even if it's just not on a user experience site. Maybe there's some technical issues on the back that might have an insight, like, I can bring other insights into that kind of discussions as well. Yeah, I know when I first started and technology back before fire was invented, we didn't care about things like user experience. You know, you basically took what you got. And if you ever watched any of the, say, airline employees when they were dealing with the old airline reservation systems, the finger contortions that they had to go through to do certain activities, it was just horrendous. It hasn't always been a valued part of software delivery, but I think it's safe to say now that you cannot have a compelling product if you don't take into account the design aspects and the user experiences of the customers. And so I agree completely. It's a very integral part of how we deliver software now. I've also been working in the industry decades now. And so I remember those days where it was a debate whether we should start with discovery and talking to people who are going to be using the product and having to defend the need for user testing with real people. And today, really, customer sensitivity is very orthodox approach to UI design. But it was hard one. You know, there were years and years of debates at the exact level to create budgets to be able to do research and testing with customers. And you know, it's certainly one of the risks that I see about going backwards if we start to create shortcuts when we use Gen AI to understand our uses. So let's talk a little bit about what are the kinds of tools you all use as you go through the design process. And for those who don't know me very well, you would know upfront you would never ever want me to be designing your user interface. I'm definitely a back end person. So help help me understand what what are the kinds of tools. I mean, we're talking about AI tools for design. But before AI, just what kinds of tools do you use in your work? And then we can talk about how that's been impacted by AI. Yeah, good question. I think tools wise, it starts with pencil and paper. So yeah, you don't really need a lot of tools to generate ideas. But designers typically would use tools to take those ideas and turn them into prototypes that we can test with. So that's where we've used for years products like Adobe, Adobe XD for prototyping. And now Vigma is really the tool of choice for a lot of designers when it comes to prototyping. We use tools like dovetail for collecting customer research. And what tools do you use? I think it's pretty much the same. Starting out pencil paper, doing sketches. I think I deep dive quite quickly into Vigma sometimes. So just kind of going in and just kind of bubbling around trying out certain wire framing and stuff like that just to get quick prototypes across. So nothing like high fidelity of fancy but just like gray boxes and a few lines to denote like images, copy, just to kind of get the discussion going with my product owners to see like, hey, is this something that would fit in the vision of where you want to take your product in? And then deep dive right into Vigma itself. So I think Vigma itself is really quite powerful, but I'm actually excited for the AI suite that hopefully we'll come up soon. Well, you attended the Vigma conference in Singapore. Yes, today didn't you, Esther? Yeah, I did online. Yes. And I think Vigma has been a really interesting one in terms of some of the tooling that they have brought into that space when it comes to how they are incorporating Gen AI. So I guess maybe that that leads to the question of what is going on in this space at the moment with pencil and paper and and how are we making that smarter? Are we making that smarter? I think it depends on the companies that you are looking at. So I can see like AI like being taken into maybe a couple of directions where when you're considering like which companies are doing so kind of like the main stays of what designers actually use today like the tools like Draftio and Vigma. Their stance on AI is about helping to augment our workflows. So Draftio and Vigma, they're introducing like AI tools to actually help us with our work rather than trying to see how can we actually design like a designer. So there are other tools out there that kind of democratize design in a way where I don't need you to be a designer. You can spin up like or working prototype that's a with minimal like knowledge about what it means to actually design something. But the AI tools that Vigma is trying to introduce is something that will actually benefit designers a lot like I'm very much looking forward to auto naming my layers because my Figma file is just a mess of like gibberish layers. So looking forward to that tool and it's something that helps us not saying that oh I'm just going to click a button and here's a prototype that my product owner can just take and put in production though. It's about like helping us to search for assets. Just doing the things that I don't necessarily take time out to do with my Figma files to make it cleaner so other designers can understand like my work as well. You spoke a little bit about democratizing design and also one of the things you mentioned there was renaming layers as well. It sounds like that type of feature is something that we know Janai can do really well. But that itself is not core to a design process. That's sort of a product help or a product feature that augments your existing workflow. Do you see this kind of tooling as something that can help people who are not in the design space to design? Do you see it as something that augments the existing professional skills of designers or is there something about it that goes both ways? For me it would definitely augment me as a designer because let's see I'm trying to find a particular layer and I kind of know what's on the layer. Let's see it's a button but it's named like xyz something something and I cannot like find it easily. I have to like dig down to like certain nested layers and stuff especially when you turn on a lot of like configurations and Figma as well and you hide things in frames and frames. So it would help me. I'm actually not going to say I know for sure how it would help people who are just starting out using Figma. Maybe it would because it would help them to understand how to I guess be better about keeping their files like cleaner and not messy so it helps them to maybe be a bit more conscious about how they're designing things on a surface. I'm not sure what did it do. I think it's really helpful in collaboration because Figma is a collaboration tool as much as it is a prototyping tool. It enables people to work in parallel and to provide feedback and so ensuring that the things like layers are clearly marked is actually really helpful for people who are collaborating in one file. So yeah so that's creating clarity and efficiency for everyone who's involved in the design process. I'd also say that when it comes to Gen AI creating efficiencies and democratising the design, what we're seeing at the moment and over the last year is just lots and lots of new startup products and tools coming out that are promising to do just that and there's certainly too many to keep abreast of them all. We've been trying to, we've been assessing some of these tools and experimenting and also comparing them with the bulk tools that we use as part of our practice to compare the output and to really understand where they can create efficiencies and still deliver a good outcome. So it is a really potentially confusing space for early career designers starting out to know what are the right tools that I should be using because the well-known tools that we potentially learn when we're studying at design school, they're still in mind-might the tool that we should be using but for a lot of non-designers there's so many other cheaper options now that are promising to do exactly the same thing and to do it more quickly. And so yeah it's a really confusing design market out there at the moment when it comes to tools and yeah it's changing from week to week it's impossible really to keep up with the innovation in this space. But I wonder though if it's not so much different to when when web design like first started and you had like spin up companies that could help you to just create like I guess websites without really the help of a designer or knowing how to code but web designers do exist as like a job that is out there. So I probably don't think it's as much as like here here's this AI tool it will help you become a designer but maybe it's an AI tool that can help you to visualize like your ideas and then maybe take it to someone who can actually then help to refine your product better. So it could help in let's say discoveries or maybe you're pitching a product to someone but it's not fully realized yet but you just need the extra help to visualize something so maybe it helps in terms like storyboarding for example we just want to get an idea across to sell it for instance. I was going to ask about that too because I know in other parts of the software development lifecycle generator AI is used to generate ideas give me some alternatives to this and so I can see that being quite useful in that discovery process or where you're trying to say okay what are the what are the different ways I can morph this base idea and you know maybe come come up with something better are you seeing any tools like that or is that just something that you might do with one of the large language models one of the the chat interfaces. Yeah that's that's a good question because yeah chat GPT can actually do all of that that you just described in terms of facilitating ideation through you know coming up with multiple ideas and scenarios and both and for different scenarios in different industries so we're already doing a lot of experiments in that space but we've also all works as created gen AI tools like boba and more recently haven and and boba was also created with that goal of helping team in ideation and strategic options for new products and services and evolving existing products so we've we've been playing around with that tool and you know sharing it with our clients and in disilligated workshops to really be I kind of think of that as having a really great sparring partner when it comes to coming up with new ideas and you know we all know that the creative journey is littered with bad ideas most ideas bad ideas and a lot of the ideas that are created by gen AI no different you know they they're not going to work that it's great to at least kickstart that process and get past the blank canvas and it does create a lot of efficiency so we've certainly been using those tools and there's still a lot of hard work in terms of the discovery process but the tools certainly help in really kickstarting the process but not reducing the need to then go and validate those ideas and the hard work of doing customer research still needs to be done with real people so it doesn't really eliminate that work it just creates some efficiencies when it comes to exploring new ideas and looking at the pros and cons of thinking about you know even what competitors are doing those tools could be useful for that as well you touched on using this as a sparring partner I have found that to be one of the best ways to engage with this type of tooling is a kind of interlock to have it back in force and use it to evolve your own ideas as a bit of a sounding board in most cases that can be beneficial because you as a professional with your knowledge can evaluate what comes back to you and and shape the output from there especially with that chatbot paradigm I think it's been a pretty helpful thing regardless of your discipline and in terms of what you're talking about regarding the work of interviewing users there have also been a lot of offerings out there that aiming to automate some part of this or say well couldn't we just generate users and we could get input from them in that sense because we know here are the breadth of things that users might or might not want we could we could synthesize that what are your thoughts on how well that fits within your practice and whether that is a complement to what you're doing or whether that actually sort of distracts from the value of the work that you're bringing to the table synthetic users and products that simulate users and create personas is probably one of the most divisive areas of GNI tools in the world research so you'll get a lot of mixed opinions foreign against the the use of these tools with a run of you experiments internally and I think you know those tools can be great in formulating what we call an approach persona so it's like a straw man persona that requires further validation and typically and historically we would create proto personas using subject matter experts or proxies for the user who have a lot of knowledge and experience with target users of a product or service but it doesn't eliminate the need to then go at out and meet those people who are using your product and test those hypotheses with them and do that for the work so it doesn't I don't say it yet has been a substitute for talking to real people but it can certainly be a great kickstart into the process and with some of these tools they also allow you to upload your own customer data which is also a great starting point so you know synthetic users has has that ability it's got apart from four large language models that it's built on it also has a rag so that means that organizations can upload their own customer data and ensure that there's accuracy in the data that it is representative with the segments that their customers have so I think there's there's certainly a role for it but my fear is that that some product companies will see this as a substitute and a shortcut and it really isn't at this stage you know our customers are the most valuable part of our products and you need to be having a continual dialogue with them testing out new ideas and continually improving based on that real time insight so yeah so I certainly I see that it's potentially going to be a part of our research but it won't replace it I think it's probably a bit dangerous to say like I can completely replace like my real people research because we got to understand like the product that we're designing right so the products that I work on in the Singapore office are sometimes like systems that are quite internal and it's not something that I'm going to openly talk about in public and that's what these kind of synthetic users do right they crawl a lot of information that's available publicly on the internet to kind of improve or train their data sets so if it's a product that is not going to be talked about on the website like a lot or it's not going to be like review like publicly a lot where are you going to get the insights from it's going to be like still locked within all your users and their knowledge of like certain like tools and stuff and products that they use so I'm pretty sure for very niche user basis you're probably not going to find this kind of users this kind of synthetic like simulations very useful unless we go down the route of we're going we actually build our own synthetic user for our own use and that's going to take time and we're going to have to do the research anyway to go and build out this prototype persona so I think it depends on maybe fine tuning the way we use this kind of personas because if it's something that say hey I want to understand like customer feedback around the world for a global product that I'm working on sure I can use it to maybe crawl like insights from all over the world on the internet and bring it to me instead of having to do like desk research hours on end to crawl for the same information but if it's information that's not going to be available publicly and I have to actually go talk to a person to understand how they actually use a very particular product then there's a very different story we're talking about. One of the core concerns that we have thought works around designing accessible products is ensuring that we take a universal design approach to accommodate all users of the product and incorporate the diversity that exists within any segment so that requires designing for the edge cases so designing for those niche users that may have a disability that or even the 50% of your segment that probably wear glasses or have other requirements that won't be sufficiently represented in a large language model which is generalizing and not always delivering some of those niche requirements that are represented by those edge cases. I think I also want to add like the hallmark of what makes a truly great user research accessibility to like tease out like certain insights that are like hidden nuggets so we're having a conversation and then suddenly the person you're interviewing like says like something maybe in passing but if you're a good researcher and then you can identify that hey actually that mention can actually lead to like certain insights that haven't been discovered yet so we're able to kind of like observe and understand like hey maybe there are some other insights that could be unlocked just because the user mentioned something that they may not think is important but it could review something that is totally relevant to where we're trying to take a product or research and I'm not sure if LMS can actually do that like they're very linear and like their discussions here's a discussion guide here this is a list of answers I want answered so they're just going to go like one two three four five and when talking to like a user or just simulating like how a user answer questions but human user researchers we would actually say hey wait a minute you said something here around question two can we deep dive into that angle further it might be a tangent that leads nowhere but it could also sometimes lead to something amazing so as designers and given what what you know about the powers of AI I will use that phrase even though it drives me nuts what's your dream tool what what what what is a place where where you would love to see AI used to support your work as a designer I guess my dream is just having a tool that gets rid of all of the repetitive annoying drudgery involved in customer research and testing and analyzing results and finding the patterns in the data you know that seems to be what Jenna AI is perfect for I don't want it to replace the fun stuff though the the really exciting work of ideation and and the the flow state that I get into when I'm designing you know I could easily lose an afternoon designing something that I'm really enjoy working on and that's the reason I'm a designer I don't want a tool to take care of the really enjoyable part of my job yeah I agree with Keith there like sometimes just the fact that if we go analog it could yield some interesting results as well we were running like a workshop with some of our clients all back and one of the activities we had was to do ideation but we tried to get them to contrast between results that you'll get with pen and paper like crazy eight versus let's say using boba AI to come up with ideas so sometimes we come up with similar ideas to AI but sometimes you have like left few ideas they are like super wild and creative I don't know what what you would get us but it's something that only the human imagination can dream out of because it's something that maybe never existed in the top bubble of like a very general average internet data so sometimes interesting things can come out if we just sit down and just let our minds wander but to Keith's point like a lot of repetitive work that sometimes just takes I guess time out of our day like let's say I have to go clean up my design system in like Figma for example I might have to hunt down like where all my different components might be used so right now today in Figma I can't just go to the design system and say hey there's this component I make some changes I want to make sure that the changes get propagated everywhere because sometimes as a glitch it might not happen like completely or if I have changed or overwrote certain settings for a particular component it might not get the change propagated for that effect and with AI I think Figma is promising that we can actually able to search where all these like components might be used so that would save me so much time if I'm trying to make sure that my production files I should care like cleaning up to date and I'm not missing out like some very special component that I might have like need special changes to so we talked earlier about junior designers and and the the potential impact of these tools but if you were talking to someone just out of design school or who was interested in getting involved and in design and wanted to explore the use of AI where would you have them start? Probably advise and to start learning about prompt engineering and start with chat GPT and really understand the importance of being able to define the outcome that you want from that tool and there's a bit of work there and I'm still learning how to write good prompts but it's a really good starting point for designers to really begin with understanding what's the outcome that you want who's the audience what's the goal here what are the constraints that we're operating in what's the context now take all of that and put that into a prompt and start and then refine and refine until you get the outcome that you want so I would start with prompt engineering I know that a lot of designers disagree with me because a lot of the tools out there have almost eliminated the need to be good at prompt engineering they provide into the places that kind of help you to think about that but I think it's really useful to understand the way these AI powered tools work and if you can improve your prompt engineering your prompting skills then that will go a long way to understanding how to get a good outcome out of GNII tools and chat GBT is a handy way to start you know it's a tool that a lot of us have in our pocket or on our laptop so I would start there I kind of want the challenge key a little bit though like you said about like understanding how to prompt better so you can achieve like the outcomes that you want but whether or not someone who understands what a good outcome is I'm not sure if AI can necessarily help us with that like knowing what good is takes years of training experience to understand what's a good like UI design what is bad UX it's trial and error like we learn as we go along and that's why we do user research we do user testing we bring it fun of people to understand that hey I designed this particular user flow but people are having issues or difficulties understanding how to use it or complete it then that's where I say oh okay then I need to make some changes to this and if you just get AI to fast track and just speed up and say hey I just want this app to do this this this it's a prototype and you say okay that's done but how do you understand where all the issues like lie do you understand where what decisions the AI actually made for you throughout this that say our prototype so I'm not sure if there is like a magic bullet to just get to the point where oh okay I just AI tools I magically know like what a good outcome is or I trust AI so much that I just assume that it's giving me the best outcome that I can achieve with my prompt yeah yeah if there is a quick way like to help people understand good outcomes I think there's still value in training up like true proper design principles and practices like don't discard like the grant work like maybe you use AI to do some prototyping maybe also do it like manually on your own to learn and understand like why did I place certain elements in this order is it important that something comes first or something comes in next page like how does everything work with regards to like all you're designing I think that's so so important as well oh yeah prompt engineering is never going to replace the designs it's interesting actually who's a really good boy and some of the most beautiful outcomes that I've seen from J&A I have come from a do per experience designer who have been working in the industry for years and really can recognize good design when they see it and they're able to use mid-genie to create extraordinary images but it's only because there be creating images in their own practice for years and they're using their own style and their own skills to allow a genai tool to augment what they do and so that recognizing good design is there's a huge risk there for non-designers using these tools that they're just going to produce a lot of very ordinary stuff and we've all seen that you know you open Instagram and have a look at a lot of the genai that's created there and it's very it's very ordinary it's you can tell that it's boring the word augment that you use there I think is really key to what what we've been talking about this entire time that it can elevate a level of skill that you may already possess at the same time also you do need to understand where your core principles are in order to know how to how to guide and to shape whatever you're getting to an ideal result I wondered also with regard to with regard to development teams who don't have a designer on stuff design is not always the first role to get filled with access to tooling like this and potentially also with a small budget particularly if you're just starting it may be that people on development teams are asked to perform the role of a designer as they frequently are without the requisite training and skills what kind of advice would you give to development teams without a designer on stuff who have access to the kinds of tooling that we've been discussing into how to use it effectively I would always start with the design process and design thinking and trust the process which it doesn't change just because there's genai tools too oh at the process really begins with understanding your users understanding the market understanding and synthesising the results of those interviews that you do and you don't have to be a designer to go out and do discovery and test your hypotheses and you don't have to be a designer to to validate ideas and improve them as you go using that design thinking approach and genai doesn't change that it just creates efficiency it's an old mindset and we see opportunities through the whole software development lifecycle to include genai that I would trust the process of a design thinking even if you're not a designer yeah it's not something there's like a very special skill set that you have to be a designer to do like design thinking about like understanding problems to be solved right and what's maybe like a good solution to solve them maybe designers have like this instinct to just get like those insights maybe quicker or just like know how to identify like pay where all these like opportunity areas maybe just quicker and hone in on like what's good to solve and what's maybe necessarily not the most value or effort to solve so I guess we also augment the teams in that way of the way that we think and just because we are just more attuned to the design process because that's what we do day in and day out so we are practiced and it's not that they can't pick it up it just might be something that might just be a bit like more difficult for them to do at the very early stages but true time do do so learn and understand that it's not something that is very unique like anybody can practice design thinking so I would say in summary you and other designers are not in any danger of being put out of business anytime soon given where the AI tools sit today and I who knows what's going to happen in in the future but I do think in particular a lot of what you've been talking about with the interaction with the customers and the user research those are the kinds of things we humans are better at than machines and we can be empathetic and we can you know make leaps that perhaps are more difficult for for an AI system to make at least at the moment so it sounds like you guys don't have to worry about being being put out of a job by automation anytime soon I'm not worried but what I would say and what we hear it's true for a lot of different roles is that we could potentially get displaced by designers who are effectively using genitals yes I think that is quite true across a large number of roles well thank you Esther thank you Kate for joining me and Lily in this discussion of AI tools in the design space and I hope you all have a wonderful day thank you thank you for having this