 Welcome to TRS Cliffs India's fastest learning portal. Make sure you subscribe, make sure you hit that bell icon. So much about cryptocurrencies nowadays. Maybe from the web to world as well, which is very hesitant about web 3 metaphors. Crypto all these things. I feel you're the kind of good neutral perspective on this because you're somewhere in the middle of it all. So what's your take? What excites you about our future when it comes to technology? Wow, so I think I can just go on for 3x hours only for one question that you just actually could. You don't have meta words, you don't have kip crypto, you spoke about blockchains, you spoke about NFTs. And there's just so much for each one of these types of technology. If I can call that as a weird but but let me just start at the concept level of what you said. In my view, when people ask me that look, what do you think? What's the future, etc, etc. I like that line which says nothing can stop an idea whose time has come. And that's blockchain for you. Crypto is an application of blockchain. Web 3.0 is an application of the blockchain technology. Now there are various ways of achieving what blockchain does, wire different ways but blockchain is the most popular way. So the future, and I'm not saying everything in the world will be on blockchain. I'm not saying that, but I'm saying that a lot of what we will do in the near future, not very distant, would definitely be powered by blockchain because it's fundamentally a different way of looking at things. It's almost like when writing was invented, socrates freaked out his story. And they were all sorts of funny things. When the engine was invented, it was like, oh, it will blast off and it will cause more deaths than when car was invented. Or there will be more road accidents and therefore it's better. Henry Ford had that very, very famous saying that if I asked people of what do you want to commute faster between two places, they would ask for faster horses and not the car which use the engine. And I would say blockchain is a technology, is exactly that one way. I would say it's a fundamentally different way of how you look at peer to peer connectivity, how you look at communication happening. And there are two key elements of blockchain when peer which is out there. One, it is distributed. Second, it has a shared memory. It's really that simple. You have to go to the basics also. While a lot of the listeners know what blockchain is, there's a lot who don't. So you have to go to the ABCs. Sure. Let's start from the ABCs. Let's run the B of blockchain. Let's take a step back and let's divide the word blockchain into two blocks which are put into a chain is called a blockchain. Really that simple. What does that mean? It simply means that whenever you're doing a series of, I don't want to call it transaction. I want to call it just actions actions actually a better word. When you're doing a series of actions, which one follows the other follows the other follows the other. And technically think about it. Everything you do from the morning, it's a series of actions that you're doing today, which is after the series of actions you did yesterday, it's that, that can be a transaction also by the way. If you actually think about, you know, 10 years back, look at your bank account. You can actually track which day, how much money you got, which day, how much money you spent. And that's a series of transactions which are out there and put that together. Now that's crypto. Now of course on the internet, right? When you go to Facebook.com for the first time, starting from creating your account, till putting your information on the account, till actually liking, commenting. Can I say to series of actions that you're taking, which can actually be, you know, linearly stored in a very normal white paper. I can just write a, you know, normal paper, Excel sheet as a, hey, number one, number two, number three, number four, number five. Now that's first, but I want to start with saying that because we all live in a time series, right? It's literally equal zero when you're born and you're moving forward from there. You can capture everything that you do in a linear fashion. Now when that happens and you capture every single aspect of a particular type of action, the more popular one being bitcoins, right? Cryptocurrencies. When you capture all transactions, one by one in a block. So you imagine one block and I'm simplifying. I'm like super dumbing it down here so that that's how I understood like long back when I was studying blockchains, right? If you, if you just put like there are just two people, you and me in the world and in total, there are 100 rupees. Can I say that 100 rupees, which is there, the sum total of what you and I will have first has to be 100 rupees? Secondly, no matter how much transactions we do, the sum total will always remain 100 rupees. And who has how much money at what time can be determined with two things? One, how much money in the beginning did you and I have? Suppose you had 70 rupees and I had 30 rupees. So it starts from t equals zero in the beginning of time. This is how much money you had. This is how much money I have. And every time we have transacted, if we put that in a very simple Excel sheet, every time you give me five rupees, I give you 10 rupees, you give me 20 rupees, you give me 30 rupees and you left it now 40 rupees and I have 60 rupees. Suppose that is the transaction. Can I say it is very simple to maintain history just by seeing the transactions? What happens in a cryptocurrency when they use blockchain? Instead of two people, there are millions of people, which are transacting. Instead of saying that there are 100 rupees because the currency value is fluctuating, but the number of bitcoins in the case, by the way, the answer is different for every type of cryptocurrency. So the total number of bitcoins was finitely capped to a particular number, 21 million at some point, that's somewhere around that. So it was already defined of the total number of bitcoins that can ever exist. And then you had to do something called proof of work and you can get into that if you want to mine those currencies. In other words, that's why I said it always starts by saying how much do you have? What is the total sum? 100 rupees. And in that, you had 70 and I had 30 to start with. So it starts as the first block saying this is how much money this person has and that's who you are. And from there, every transaction is captured in a particular block. So today when you do a transaction on a bitcoin, it basically says this bitcoin wallet, it basically has private keys of the way the encryption works there. So this bitcoin wallet, the private key is signed using the public key. So your actual identity is the public key, which is actually a cryptographic key using which you're sending the money to a particular cryptographic key. The way in WhatsApp, your phone number is your identity. In the world of bitcoins, your public key is your identity. What if you're sending 0.001 to like someone? Does the blockchain become smaller or something? So I'm saying the blockchain only keep becoming bigger and bigger because blockchain doesn't care about the value of transaction. Okay. The entry that you're doing, whether you do it for $1 million or $1 million blockchains, sorry, $1 million bitcoins, or you do it for 0.000001 bitcoins, it doesn't matter. It's an entry. So okay, I'm asking you this over visualization, for sure. When we say something is based on blockchain technology, you're definitely not talking about just one chain of blocks, right? I'm talking about one chain of blocks. Only one chain of blocks. I'm talking about each block and that's the reason I'm saying every time there's a transaction anywhere in the world, the block has to become bigger. It doesn't matter what the transaction is. And what happens is this entire block. Remember, these are text strings, right? Text characters, right? Let's simplify that. So this will be a few MD file which will be out there that entire block is stored at thousands of computers. So that becomes the blockchain and that's why it's called blockchain because every block will have list of transactions. And every block is connected to the next block using the previous blocks hash value. And therefore if you change anything in a very old block, even in the previous block, you have to change every block moving forward. And this actually happened by the way. Has it ever happened that blockchain, some blockchain technology has changed transactions from the past? Can you change it? The answer is yes you can. But then majority of the key stakeholders have to agree saying, okay, there was a screw up we did say six months back and we want to change that. This is a good example of Ethereum where there was this huge exchange which actually got hacked. And there was millions of dollars which basically got disappeared and they were transferred. So a lot of people in fact majority of the Ethereum community came together to say, no, that's not right. Because there's so many people impacted. I want to go to the point of reversing the transaction and please keep this in mind. A person cannot do it. It has to be the entire community. And even in that run, we're while most people said we should do it. There was still a small minority of people said, no, we should not do it. I mean this was people and their conscious decision of transferring money there and they got hacked and hacks happen and that's fine. So what happened was there were two different types of Ethereum which was born. Therefore it's Ethereum classic and then there's the other Ethereum which is out there. So you can change the thing but it needs thousands of people. How do they make a decision? They have come together at some conference or like what is it? Chat forums of course. So there are various chat forums which are out there. There are so many ways of communication if somebody wants to just keep listening in what's going on there. IRC channels which are out there and we spoke about Deep and Dark Web. There are a lot of forums which are dedicated for the discussions of individual types of crypto. And there are a lot of, you know, again, there are flavors of crypto which are out there. And there is a bunch of people and this is the reason why a lot of people think crypto means completely decentralized. No, it's not completely decentralized. It's just that there is not one company which is making money out of it which controls it. But there's still a bunch of people who control the first principles of how the blockchain, that particular blockchain is supposed to operate in behavior. So again going back to the visualization where you said that Bitcoin as a currency has one chain which attaches a series of blocks to each other. And every time anyone transags in Bitcoin. It adds more to it. Yeah. Any other word. So someone, Vasile could be doing it. This second, someone in Pakistan could be doing it this second. Correct. And things have been added on the blockchain. And blockchain has a problem of number of transactions per second. Okay. The reason I added that complexity, that's the reason why when you want to do a transaction on, say, bitcoins for example, bitcoins can only take up to and it depends, you know, X number of transactions per second. So in other words, if you right now want to make a transaction on Bitcoin, you can't immediately make it. Because there's a limit because remember every block goes to the network and says, you have to tell me if I'm a valid transaction. So Bitcoin, you know, will be a few transactions a second. Ethereum now goes up to like 13, 14, 15 transactions per second. And that's just where we are. That's a technological, I would say, challenge. And that's the reason why scaling it up to crazy ways where, you know, if you say, I'm going to have the Bitcoin wallet on my phone where I will pay for every coffee and I will pay for every thing. It doesn't happen. You can fast forward the transaction by paying more. But then your transaction fees will go up. So basically every time you want to exchange money for Bitcoin or a crypto exchange, you're entering a sort of queue, an international queue. And then when you're ready, whatever, you can exchange your money for. So it can either be you exchange it for very little transaction fee, but it'll take much longer. Or you can pay more. It's like a VIP service, right? So you take that and then you actually get ahead of the queue because, and that's how you will be able to, you know, transact faster. So that was one question I had. The other question is, you know how you said that, Okay, Bitcoin is governed by one chain, which has blocks linked to each other. Yes. Similarly, Ethereum is running on a separate chain with its own blocks. Yes. Similarly, whenever we say that, okay, this is a blockchain-based technology, it has its own chain with different blocks. That's the logic. Absolutely. Okay. So blockchain essentially means that you're absolutely right. In first principles, you always have blocks which are connecting to each other. And there is a history. So again, I said there are two things which define the concept of blockchain. One, it is distributed. The second, it has shared memory. So something which is computing at not one, like the transaction validation of a particular crypto, will not happen in one system on one server that happens today in a bank, right? So the bank goes, okay, do you have this bank balance? Yes, you do. I approve of it. And you're able to go ahead and do the transaction immediately. That's one server. So one, it's very, very distributed where there'll be thousands of systems again, thousand depends on what crypto you're talking about. But there'll be a lot of nodes which will be computing exactly the same thing. And saying, is that a valid transaction or not? And if majority of the nodes which are there in the network, and you also build a reputation of the node depending on the number of years, the number of currency that you mind, etc., etc. So there's a full algorithm for that also. And once most of the chain says that yes, this is a trustable valid transaction, that is where it becomes formally a part of the blockchain. And the new blockchain is then broadcasted in the whole network, saying, you know, this is where it is. Most of the nodes already have that because they were the ones who validated it also. But and if there is any anomaly, so I'm trying to send you $100. I only have $50 in my wallet. So it'll flag that as an anomaly and that will not become a part of the blockchain which is out there. So blockchain is a technology, you're absolutely right. It's blocks with transactions which are shared with each other and they share a common memory because that's a common memory between everybody which is out there. So that it becomes theoretically decentralized. So that's definitely decentralized. Music