 Basically, too many smart people go into finance and all. So, you know, this is both a complement and a criticism. We should have, I think, fewer people doing law and fewer people doing finance and more people making stuff. Oh, yeah. What's up, Global Citizens? I'm Thiago, your real life, Fluency Coach. And today we have a great conversation to learn English from with podcaster Joe Rogan and the controversial yet legendary and visionary entrepreneur Elon Musk. But in case you're new here, our method is really simple. First, you'll watch the scenes with subtitles. Then we'll teach you some of the most important vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation from the clips. Finally, you will test your listening skills by watching the scenes again without subtitles. But before we get started, make sure you hit that subscribe button and bell down below because every week we put out a new lesson like this to help you understand your favorite movies, TV series, and of course podcasts and interviews. With all getting lost, with all missing the jokes and without subtitles. So hit that subscribe button in order not to miss a single new lesson. Now let's get started. In the clip, Elon talks about how people often have the wrong idea about him and other billionaires. Let's see what he has to say. Do you feel like people define you by the fact that you're wealthy and that they define you in a pejorative way? For sure. Not everyone. But for sure, in recent years, billionaires has become a pejorative. It's a bad thing. I think that doesn't make a lot of sense in most cases. So how does this wealth arise? If you organize people in a better way to produce products and services that are better than what existed before and you have some ownership in that company, then that essentially gives you the right to allocate more capital. So there's a conflation of consumption and capital allocation. Do you feel like people define you by the fact that you're wealthy? If a person has a substantial amount of money and material possessions, this person is wealthy, in other words, this person has a lot of money. And they define you in a pejorative way? Pejorative is a great word. If you talk about somebody in a pejorative way, you are speaking about that person from a negative perspective. You're not being very kind to that person. A great synonym for pejorative is derogatory. If you are derogatory or speak about someone in a derogatory way, it's the same idea. You are talking about that person negatively. By the way, this reminds me of a classic clip from Rocky 2. You know the Rocky Balboa movies? In Rocky 2, there is this press conference where a reporter asked Rocky to comment something derogatory about his opponent, Apollo Creed. In that movie, he's not very educated, so he doesn't really understand what derogatory means. So he's really cool to see the clip because he kind of uses derogatory in a positive way because he doesn't understand what it means. Check it out. Rocky, you got anything derogatory to say about the champ? Derogatory. Yeah, he's great. For sure, in recent years, billionaire has become a pejorative. He likes it to make pejorative. It's like that's a bad thing. Which I think doesn't make a lot of sense in most cases. Great. Not the speech here. So we have it doesn't. It doesn't. The T for it is a stop T. We say it doesn't. Also the T for doesn't also kind of disappears and then make the A is a schwa sound. The T for lot is a flap T data, which then joins with the proposition of. And again, the proposition of is reduced to another schwa sound. So we don't say of we say of. So putting it together, it doesn't make a lot of sense. Which I think don't doesn't make a lot of sense. Which I think don't doesn't make a lot of sense. So like how does this world arise? It's to arise means to come into existence or to appear. Here's an example. It's essential to be prepared for any challenges that may arise in the course of this project. Don't forget the conjugation of this verb. We have a rise, the base form, a rose, the simple bass form, and a reason that bass participle form. If you organize people in a better way to produce products and services that are better than what existed before and you have some ownership in that company. When you have ownership of something, you own it. It's yours. It belongs to you. In the clip, Musk is talking about when you have shares of companies or stocks. You have parts of companies they belong to you. Here's an example. I want 90% ownership. 90%? Are you out of your mind? No, I'm not. That essentially gives you the right to allocate more capital. Capital means money. It's a common word when talking about business, finance, and investing. To allocate capital means to set aside or reserve capital for a specific purpose. For example, I always allocate 10% of my monthly income for savings. So it's a conflation of consumption and capital allocation. When you conflate two things, you believe they are the same by putting them in the same category. But the problem with doing this is that you end up creating confusion. Consumption is the noun for consume. Musk is saying that people usually confuse consumption and capital allocation. In that, if you're making an acquisition like buying a private property, for example, you're not necessarily buying it for yourself to consume it. You may simply be allocating capital, transform your money into a physical property, and that could potentially generate more money in the future. Through rent, for example. I'm sure you've been learning many nice words and expressions today, huh? But let me tell you that if you don't review this vocabulary, you will likely forget it very, very soon. If you want to be able to actually use these words you're learning today, next time you get into a English conversation, I have super exciting news to share with you today. You have to check out the Learn English TV series Flashcards on the Real Life English app. This is the newest feature of our Real Life English app, which allows you to unlock intelligent flashcards with definitions and images for the specific lesson you're watching here on the channel. Instead of having to spend a lot of time taking notes of these words, you can review all the vocabulary you're learning today on the app with just a few clicks. Plus, you get to wash this lesson inside the app so you can transition between watching and practicing more easily. And most importantly, our app Special Algorithm will present you with the vocabulary card you're learning at the exact moment you're about to forget it, so you can transfer your learning from your short-term memory to permanently remember the words. Just imagine what it would be like if you could remember all the new words from this lesson and actually use them in your conversations. Imagine how confident you would feel with your English and how people will be impressed by your large vocabulary. Imagine communicating confidently in that meeting, in that job interview, in that English test you have to take, or in that conversation with a local while traveling. So what are you waiting for? Start taking your vocabulary to the max level today with the Learn English TV series Flashcards. What you need to do is download the Real Life English app and follow the instructions so you can unlock this exclusive deck of cards for this lesson. The link will be in the description, click on it, download it and follow the instructions.